(11) VCU vs. (6) North Carolina
Upset chance: 39%
6:50 p.m. ET on Thursday

North Carolina's ceiling is significantly lower with star freshman Caleb Wilson (broken thumb) out for the season. Predictably, the Tar Heels' efficiency numbers dropped off in the eight games Wilson missed, especially on the offensive glass and in 2-point field goal percentage on offense and defense. That opens the door for a VCU team that has won 16 of its past 17 games entering the tournament. The Rams have a balanced, versatile and aggressive attack. All eight of VCU's regular rotation players have hit at least 18 3s this season, and the Rams get to the free throw line at the 15th-highest rate in the country.



(11) Texas vs. (6) BYU
Upset chance: 37%
7:25 p.m. ET on Thursday

The Longhorns are limping into the Big Dance, having lost five of their past six. Scoring isn't a problem for Texas, but defense is. It will be important for 7-footer Matas Vokietaitis to stay on the court. He has been in foul trouble often this season but can be a difference-maker in this matchup as Texas looks to keep pace with a thinner but still potent BYU attack. Texas will have to beat NC State first, though.

Men's Tournament Challenge


Sign up now to play the #1 Men's bracket game for FREE! $125,000 in prizes.
Play Men's Tournament Challenge




(11) SMU vs. (6) Tennessee
Upset chance: 25%
Potential matchup: 4:25 p.m. ET on Friday

The Giant Killers model likes SMU to take care of Miami (Ohio) in the First Four on Wednesday, but it isn't as keen on the Mustangs building on that against the Vols. Their upset hopes might hinge on how B.J. Edwards -- the team's best defender -- looks in his return from the ankle injury that caused him to miss SMU's past five games (the Mustangs went 1-4 in those games). Tennessee is the nation's best offensive rebounding team but is susceptible to turnovers. The Mustangs will have to win the turnover battle and cash them in.



(12) High Point vs. (5) Wisconsin
Upset chance: 24%
1:50 p.m. ET on Thursday

High Point is the only 12-seed with at least a 20% chance to win, according to the model, and this could be one of the highest-scoring games of the first round. The Panthers are all about turnover differential. They are in the top five nationally in turnover rate at both ends of the court and score 21 points per game off miscues. However, no one is better at avoiding live-ball turnovers than Wisconsin, and the Badgers shoot it well, too. Wisconsin guards John Blackwell and Nick Boyd have combined for 50 points per game over their past four outings, so slowing that duo will be critical for High Point.



(11) South Florida vs. (6) Louisville
Upset chance: 19%
1:30 p.m. ET on Thursday

Although the upset chance appears low here, the uncertainty surrounding the health of Louisville freshman guard Mikel Brown Jr. (back) could play a big part in whether the Bulls will play the role of Giant Killer. USF is 19-3 since late December, with those three defeats coming by a combined five points. Both teams want to push the pace but have distinct approaches. No bones about it, Louisville wants to shoot the 3 -- the Cards make 11.5 per game, accounting for 41% of their scoring. And although the Bulls do have a pair of snipers with 100-plus 3s (Wes Enis and Joseph Pinion), they lead the country in second-chance points thanks to Izaiyah Nelson. There's a reason this game has the highest total on the board in the first round.



(12) McNeese vs. (5) Vanderbilt
Upset chance: 19%
3:15 p.m. ET on Thursday

This 5 vs. 12 matchup has some similarities to High Point-Wisconsin. McNeese thrives off takeaways (22.3 points per game off turnovers, tops in the nation), but Vandy takes good care of the ball. Which strength will win out? The backcourt duo of Tyler Tanner and Duke Miles might be tough for the McNeese ball pressure to crack, but don't count out the Cowboys, who were one of two 12-seeds to win in last year's Dance.



(12) Akron vs. (5) Texas Tech
Upset chance: 18%
12:40 p.m. ET on Friday

Tech's national championship hopes took a big hit when All-American JT Toppin suffered a season-ending ACL injury a month ago. The Red Raiders enter with three straight losses, but they are still as dangerous as any team from beyond the arc and are led by the dynamic Christian Anderson (18.9 PPG, 7.6 APG). Texas Tech relies heavily on the 3-ball (43% of its points come from deep) and so does Akron (39% from 3), which has won 10 in a row and 19 of 20 entering the tourney. The Zips are the shortest team in this year's field, so it will be important for them to be efficient offensively and guard the line at the other end, which has been an issue for them this season.



(12) Northern Iowa vs. (5) St. John's
Upset chance: 15%
7:10 p.m. ET on Friday

If UNI is going to pull off the upset, it will have to control the tempo, make perimeter shots and limit the Johnnies to one shot per possession. St. John's is among the nation's leaders in second-chance points, thanks especially to Zuby Ejiofor and Dillon Mitchell. Unfortunately for the Panthers, their ability to run opponents off the 3-point line won't be so helpful against a Red Storm team that prefers to do damage in the paint. Northern Iowa turned the corner this season after getting 6-6, 235-pound Tristan Smith back from injury in February, and the Panthers will need his presence if they are to pull a stunner.

Where's Miami (Ohio), you might ask?
The model gave the RedHawks only a 10% chance of upsetting Tennessee, should they beat SMU to advance to the first round. After being sent to Dayton despite losing only one game all season, Travis Steele's squad will certainly have plenty of motivation to prove itself.


Editor's note: The following has been moved to the bottom of this story following NC State's loss to Texas in the First Four.



(11) NC State vs. (6) BYU
Upset chance: 37%
Potential matchup: 7:25 p.m. ET on Thursday

NC State enters the tournament having lost seven of its past nine games. But just two years ago, the Wolfpack made a run to the Final Four as an 11-seed. That team also stumbled to the finish line in regular-season ACC play before winning five games in five days to win the ACC tournament and earn a spot in the Big Dance. Although this year's group is much better offensively than the 2024 edition and can keep up with the Cougars on the scoreboard, the Wolfpack's defense will have to show some teeth in order to pull off the upset. NC State has allowed 87 points and nearly 11 3-pointers per game over its past nine outings. BYU is not as potent without Richie Saunders (ACL), but the duo of AJ Dybantsa and Robert Wright III is quite formidable. Provided they beat Texas in Tuesday night's First Four matchup, the Wolfpack will need to play to their strengths of valuing the ball (ninth-best turnover rate in the nation) and shooting the 3 (10th best at 39%) to win this one.